A Text-Mining Approach to Evaluate the Importance of
Information Systems Research Themes
Abstract: This study combines text-mining techniques and exploratory factor analysis to
identify significant research themes in the information systems (IS) field during the last
decade. We analyzed 483 papers that have been published in the Management Information
Systems Quarterly (MISQ) journal since 2010. We found that the most published themes in
the MISQ are: (1) the impact of information systems and digital innovation on
organizational performance, (2) the influence of computer-mediated communication and
social media within individuals and groups, (3) information systems development and
project management, (4) design science, and (5) decision making and information Systems.
We also perform econometric analysis to study the effect of these research themes on the
number of downloads, citations and reads in Google Scholar (SC), ResearchGate (RG),
and the Association for Information Systems (AIS) library. This study shows that “the
impact of information systems and digital innovation on organizational performance" and
“the influence of computer-mediated communication and social media within individuals
and groups” are positively associated with the number of reads, downloads, and citations.
However, “information systems development and project management” is negatively
associated with the number of reads, downloads, and citations. The methodology used here
can be implemented in other areas of research by journal editors and research institutions
to identify the most sought-after areas of future research. Also, understanding the most
relevant themes of IS research can help universities revise their IS doctorate curriculum to
better meet the needs of today's academic workforce.
Keywords: Text Mining, IS Research Themes, Social Media, IS Curriculum
2
1. Introduction
The study of research themes in any academic discipline is essential to investigating
changes in these themes and the plethora of emerging challenges (Palvia, Kakhki, Ghoshal,
Uppala, & Wang, 2015). Leading academic journals play an essential role in addressing this need.
In response, premium business journals have published similar studies to inform scholars about
how the prominent research themes in their discipline have evolved (Donthu, Gremler, Kumar, &
Pattnaik, 2020; Lamberton & Stephen, 2016; Linnenluecke, Marrone, & Singh, 2020). Similar
studies are also required in the Information Systems (IS) discipline due to the rapid changes in
Information Technology and its corresponding societal impacts (Goyal, Ahuja, & Guan, 2018).
This study, particularly, is motivated by two important gaps in the prior research. First,
previous studies that have investigated IS themes are somewhat limited. They either analyze a
specific research area in IS or use traditional methodologies (e.g., content analysis) to examine IS
themes (Hughes et al., 2019; Palvia et al., 2015; Senyo, Addae, & Boateng, 2018). Using content
analysis as a research tool is a labor-intensive process, which makes it challenging to analyze a
vast number of journal articles. As such, there is a need to use data-driven approaches to evaluate
IS research themes (Goyal et al., 2018; Okoli, 2015). Second, the emergence of social media and
social networking platforms has transformed the way individuals interact with one another
(Aghakhani, Karimi, & Salehan, 2018). This transformation is also evident in the online
community of practice, particularly scholar communities (Yu, Wu, Alhalabi, Kao, & Wu, 2016).
Researchers usually rely on sharing their research output to gain peer recognition or funding
opportunities (Mas-Bleda, Thelwall, Kousha, & Aguillo, 2014). The emergence of social platforms
has enabled researchers to conveniently connect with their peers and collaborate and to promote
their research. For instance, someone can promote his/her research by sharing a link to his/her
3
recently published article(s) on LinkedIn. ResearchGate is an example of a professional social
networking service for scholars that facilitates peer recognition by allowing researchers to follow
each other, share their projects, and receive feedback on their research.
Understanding the drivers of peer recognition and attention in online communities has been
an important research topic in IS (Bhattacharyya, Banerjee, Bose, & Kankanhalli, 2020). For
instance, in the context of online consumer reviews, studies use text mining and natural language
processing techniques to examine how the content of online reviews can predict review readership
or review helpfulness (Lah & Dahlan, 2017; Siering, Muntermann, & Rajagopalan, 2018). The
same analogy can be used in the scholars' online social community, where citation counts or
readership counts can signal the members' reputation and peer recognition. This paper aims to fill
these gaps by addressing the following research questions:
• RQ1: How can IS research themes be evaluated using big data analytics?
• RQ2: What are the major IS research themes based on big data analytics?
• RQ3: What is the association between IS research themes and the number of reads,
citations, and downloads?
To address these questions, we propose a data-driven method that combines text mining
and econometrics models to identify the major IS research themes and examine their effect on
citation counts, download counts, and readership counts in various platforms. Our sample includes
483 papers published in MISQ since 2010. For each article in our sample, we collected the citation
counts from Google Scholar and ResearchGate. We also obtained download counts from the AIS
library and readership counts from ResearchGate. This study contributes to the field by extending
the notion of IS research themes to the context of attention and peer recognition in the online social
platforms of scholars. This study also informs scholars about the major research themes in the
4
Information Systems (IS) discipline and their association with the number of citations, number of
reads, and number of downloads in the Google Scholar, ResearchGate, and the AIS Library.
2.Literature
Any science's business is to develop new understandings of past, persisting, or newly
identified natural phenomena (Jackson, 1996). In this quest, a series of meta-scientific methods
are developed to provide insights into the main scientific themes and identify features of theories
that predict their long-term survival (Faust & Meehl, 2002). Previous research suggests that
theme analysis plays an essential role in forming perceptions (Linell, 2010) and influencing how
decisions are made (Putnam & Cooren, 2004). There is evidence of using theme analysis outside
the realm of scientific research. For example, organizational scholars have demonstrated that
theme analysis can help them understand drivers of corporate sustainability (Sodhi & Tang,
2018). It is also used to describe mergers and acquisitions (Christofi, Leonidou, & Vrontis,
2017), corporate restructuring (Sonenshein, 2010), organizational innovations (Bartel & Garud,
2009), and strategy formulations (Barry & Elmes, 1997). Several other studies use annual reports
(Subramanian, Insley, & Blackwell, 1993), shareholder letters (Jameson, 2000), press releases
(Henry, 2008), and corporate websites (Pollach, 2003) as the object of a theme analysis.
Research theme analysis has also been an essential topic in IS research and education,
mainly due to the rapid technological advances in Information Technology (e.g., the emergence
of social media or the shift toward AI and big data analytics) and its corresponding impact on
individuals and organizations. Broadly, theme analysis in IS can be classified into two major
streams in terms of adopted methodologies. First, early studies have used literature review and
meta-analysis methods to examine the research themes in a specific domain of IS or to discover
primary IS research from papers published in major IS journals. For instance, Nevo and
5
Kotlarsky (2020) have analyzed the major research published on crowdsourcing in information
systems literature. Similar studies also have been done in other IS fields, such as analyzing the
effect of Information Technology on productivity (Appiahene, Ussiph, & Missah, 2018) and
evaluating health information systems research (Haried, Claybaugh, & Dai, 2019). Other studies
in this line of work have examined the foci of IS research and have discovered the core research
themes. For instance, Palvia et al. (2015) have conducted a meta-analysis on seven major IS
journals and found that electronic commerce is a significant research theme and survey analysis
is the dominant research methodology. In a similar vein, Mazaheri, Lagzian, and Hemmat (2020)
have reported that electronic commerce/business, information systems research, and IS
usage/adoption are the dominant research topics in IS.
The second stream of research has adopted objective methodologies such as quantitative
content analysis and text mining to address the lack of accuracy and labor-intensiveness of the
literature review method (Goyal et al., 2018; Okoli, 2015; Palvia et al., 2015). Weigel, Rainer Jr,
Hazen, Cegielski, and Ford (2013) have used a quantitative content analysis method to explore
2,188 papers published over a ten-year period in medical informatics, information systems, as
well as medical journals and discovered significant themes and sub-themes in this domain.
Sidorova, Evangelopoulos, Valacich, and Ramakrishnan (2008) have used Latent Semantic
Analysis (LSA) on the abstracts of research papers published in MISQ, ISR, and JMIS over a
ten-year period and identified five core research themes. Similarly, Goyal et al. (2018) have used
the LSA method on the abstracts of papers published in MISQ, ISR, JMIS, and JAIS to identify
the emergent research themes in IS and the specific research theme that a particular journal
desires most.
6
Our research intends to contribute to these prior studies in two important ways. First, the
literature suggests that text mining has become a prominent method to objectively identify IS
research themes. While previous text mining studies have mainly used the abstracts of the papers
as the main text corpus in their analysis, this study uses the entire journal text. Also, our study
proposes a novel analytical framework by integrating a modified version of MapReduce with
Exploratory Factor Analysis to identify essential keywords that will be used later to build
research theme dictionaries using the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) program.
Second, our research will extend the notion of theme analysis to peer recognition in scholars'
online social communities. We will notably examine how the research themes are associated
with citation counts, download counts, and readership on Google Scholar, the AIS Library, and
ResearchGate platforms.
3. Methodology
Text mining is a variety of techniques used to discover patterns in a collection of text
documents (Feldman & Sanger, 2007). Text mining has been used successfully in theme analysis
to identify patterns and quantify emerging keywords, providing insight into the structure,
context, and trends of themes (Galati & Bigliardi, 2019; Nie & Sun, 2017; Shin et al., 2018).
When combined with Big Data platforms and techniques, text mining becomes a powerful
approach in theme analysis. Specifically, the methodology proposed in this study encompasses
the following steps.
Step 1: Data Collection
The analysis source is the full text of the 482 articles published in MISQ since 2010. The
articles are downloaded from the AIS Library. The full text and keywords for articles are
organized into folders. For longitudinal studies, the information is classified into subfolders
7
according to the publication year. Also, for every article in our corpus, we have collected the
citation counts from Google Scholar, download counts from AIS library, and citation counts and
readership counts from ResearchGate.
Step 2: Apply MapReduce to count keyword frequencies
At this step, a modified version of the MapReduce program is used to count the
frequencies for each keyword. The traditional MapReduce algorithm (Dean & Ghemawat, 2008)
is modified to measure the frequency of words found in a full-text corpus, using the authors of
the published articles' keyword list.
Step 3: Use the Pareto principle to reduce the number of keywords
The exploratory factor analysis that follows requires a small number of measurable
variables or keywords. Following the Pareto principle (Arnold, 2015), only the most frequently
used keywords (e.g., the top 20 percent) are used in the analysis. The 80/20 principle is only a
rule of thumb and may not apply in all circumstances, although an approximate application of the
rule is recommended.
Step 4: Perform exploratory factor analysis
Each file represents the data points for the factor analysis (e.g., journal article). Once the
most frequent keywords are identified, the frequency index fij of each keyword i in article j is
calculated as follows:
𝒇𝒊𝒋 =
𝑭𝒊𝒋
𝑻𝒋
where Fij is the frequency of the keyword i in article j, and 𝑇j is the total number of words in
article j. When applying factor analysis in this methodology, it is essential to make sure that the
sample size is adequate, i.e., the number of text files is significantly large. One must also ensure
that at least three variables are associated with each of the expected factor categories or themes.
8
A theme is determined by the similarity between the underlying variables (keywords). However,
it is suggested that the total number of variables used to identify themes should be no more than
one-third of the sample size. Like other cases in factor analysis, Bartlett’s test must be
significant, where a small value of significance (p< 0.05) indicates that factor analysis produces
useful results from the data (Snedecor & Cochran, 1989).
Table 1 shows the output of the factor analysis. It shows the loading coefficients for each
keyword into major factors or themes. We omitted loading values less than 0.35 for clarity of
representation. As shown, the factor analysis yields five factors based on the top frequent
keywords from Step 4. These factors and their corresponding keywords represent the major
themes in our data. The authors have labeled these factors based on their similar research themes
in IS as follows: Factor (1) The Impact of Information Systems and Digital Innovation on
Organizational Performance; Factor (2) The Influence of Computer-Mediated Communication
and Social Media within Individuals and Groups; Factor (3) Information Systems Development
and Project Management; Factor (4) Design Science; and Factor (5) Decision Making and
Information Systems.
